---
title: "Automatic Identification and Visualization of Group Training Activities Using Wearable Data"
#collection: publications
#permalink: /publication/2009-10-01-paper-title-number-1
#excerpt: 'This paper is about the number 1. The number 2 is left for future work.'
#date: 2023-10-01
#venue: '2023 14th International Conference on Network of the Future (NoF)'
#slidesurl: ''
#paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10302794'
#citation: '@inproceedings{gahtan2023using,
#  title={Using Deep Reinforcement Learning for mmWave Real-Time Scheduling},
#  author={Gahtan, Barak and Cohen, Reuven and Bronstein, Alex M and Kedar, Gil},
#  booktitle={2023 14th International Conference on Network of the Future (NoF)},
#  pages={71--79},
#  year={2023},
#  organization={IEEE}
#}'
---

Human Activity Recognition (HAR) is a crucial research area focused on identifying daily activities through the analysis of time-series data collected from wearable devices such as smartwatches. Recent advancements in Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing, and low-cost sensors have broadened HAR applications across fields like healthcare, biometrics, sports, and personal fitness. However, challenges remain in efficiently processing the vast amounts of data generated by these devices and developing models that can accurately recognize a wide range of activities from continuous recordings, without relying on predefined activity training sessions. This paper presents a comprehensive framework for imputing, analyzing, and identifying activities from wearable data, specifically targeting group training scenarios without explicit activity sessions. Our approach is based on data collected from 135 soldiers wearing Garmin 55 smartwatches over six months. The framework integrates multiple data streams, handles missing data through cross-domain statistical methods, and identifies activities with high accuracy using machine learning (ML). Additionally, we utilized statistical analysis techniques to evaluate the performance of each individual within the group, providing valuable insights into their respective positions in the group in an easy-to-understand visualization. These visualizations facilitate easy understanding of performance metrics, enhancing group interactions and informing individualized training programs. We evaluate our framework through traditional train-test splits and out-of-sample scenarios, focusing on the model's generalization capabilities. Additionally, we address sleep data imputation without relying on ML, improving recovery analysis. Our findings demonstrate the potential of wearable data for accurately identifying group activities, paving the way for intelligent, data-driven training solutions. 

Currently under review.      